
        The “Lords of the Plains” were the most powerful nation in the Northern Plains. The “Lords of the Plains” was the nickname given to the Blackfeet Nation because of how powerful they were in the Great Plains, but in their native language, they were known as Sikikawa. The Blackfeet Nation is made up of three tribes: Piegan, Blood, and Blackfeet. A “nation” is a tribe or group of tribes under one tribal government, kind of like a family that all lives together. People believe the Blackfeet Nation’s name probably came from the blackened bottoms of the moccasins the members of the group wore.
        Prior to the 1600s, the Blackfeet lived in the Eastern United States in the woods north of the Great Lakes. From having conflicts with their neighbors, the Cree Indians, the tribe decided to move west to the Great Plains in the early 1600s. They traveled to the Great Plains by dog pulled sleds called travois and on foot, as they did not have horses at the time. Historians believe the Blackfeet are the earliest Algonquian people to move West.
The traditional homelands of the Blackfeet were a vast, mixed land of grassland, mountains, canyons, rivers and forests, including vast expanses of plains in the area of North America around what is now the State of Montana in the United States and the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan in Canada. 
The Blackfeet were nomadic hunters who lived in tipis made of buffalo hide and wooden poles. Tipis were triangular shaped tents that were easily set up and taken down so the tribe could follow the buffalo. Summers on the plains were mild, but winters were cold and dry, with arctic winds that would lower the temperatures to below zero. Snow storms would often bury tipis. Warmer Chinook winds would bring a few days of spring like weather, breaking up the harsh winters.
        Some customs of the three tribes are different, but all three speak the same language and share similar beliefs and traditions. There was no written language of the early Blackfeet, and the history of the People is passed to the next generation verbally. Each tribe of Blackfeet was composed of numerous independent bands of 20-30 families each. A band would have about 200 people. All the bands in each tribe were related to each other and would come together during summers for buffalo hunts and ceremonies, including the yearly Sun Dance.
Each band of Blackfeet had two chiefs, a Peace Chief who handled the daily needs of the tribe and a War Chief who was in charge while the tribes were fighting. Both chiefs served together in the Blackfeet tribal government, known as a Tribal Council. The Chiefs were chosen based on their fighting and hunting prowess. Within the tribes, there were several military, religious and social societies the people could join, depending on their wealth, fighting and hunting prowess and age. These societies would perform unique ceremonies during the Sun Dance gathering.
The Sun Dance is the most important ceremony in the Blackfeet culture. It is held over the course of four days in mid summer, in a lodge built of cottonwood around a tall center pole. Both men and women participate in the Sun Dance. The dancers fast and drink no water during the four day ceremony, during which they sing songs and pray to the Sun Spirit to bring them strength. Often, the dancers would cut parts of their body as part of the ceremony. One of the ceremonies performed by the military societies is a mock buffalo hunt, were some participants dress up like buffalo and get corralled. Both the United States and Canadian Governments outlawed the Sun Dance in the late nineteenth century, but it never vanished and is still practiced today.
The Blackfeet hunted buffalo on the plains. Buffalo were very important to the lives and culture of the Blackfeet. All members of a band would be involved in the hunt. At first, the buffalo were hunted on foot by circling a herd and scaring them to chase them over cliffs. The men would disguise themselves as animals, and the children would wave blankets to make the buffalo stampede over a cliff. Other hunters would then move in to kill the buffalo with spears or bow and arrow. The women would then rush in to butcher the animals so the meat did not spoil in the prairie heat.
Later they learned to ride and hunt on horseback in the early to mid 18th century. The Blackfeet used bow and arrows to hunt the buffalo, even after they began trading for guns and rifles. Firearms were slow to reload on horseback. With horses, the Blackfeet could hunt more buffalo faster, which lead to surplus goods they were able to trade with other Native Tribes. 
The women would skin and butcher the hunted animals and little was ever wasted. Some meat would be used immediately, while other meat would be cut into strips and dried in the sun for winter. Dried meat could also be pounded into small pieces called pemmican to be used during long journeys. Animal hides would be tanned and made into buckskin and leather for clothing, moccasins and tipis. 
When trappers and explorers first began to enter Blackfeet territory, the Blackfeet killed the white intruders, but by the early 1800’s, they had made agreements to trap beavers and other fur-bearing animals to trade the pelts at trading posts for guns, ammunition, tools, glass beads and blankets.
Women took care of camp and children while men hunted. They gathered roots, berries and other wild plants for food and medicine. 
Blackfeet believe in many supernatural beings, both good and evil. The Sun, Thunder and many animals were believed to be supernatural beings that blended into daily life. Worship of the supernatural beings was a part of the day, as the People went thru their daily activities. In preparation for various ceremonies, the men would gather in sweat lodges.
Young men would often go on vision quests in remote places to seek out guardian spirits to guide them in daily activities and in battle or hunts. These guardian spirits would bring good luck and guide the young man to spiritual songs and objects, known as talismans. The objects would often then be found and placed into medicine bundles for later use.
Blackfeet healers are known as Shamans, or medicine men. The Blackfeet also have a number of female Shamans. The Blackfeet believe the Shamans obtain their ability to heal through visions. Illness and injuries were treated by ceremonies to drive away the evil spirits causing the illness and with medicinal herbs. New Shamans learned about the medicinal herbs and natural medicines by working with an older Shaman.
        Blackfeet women and girls would wear long, sleeveless one piece dresses made from deerskin, goatskin or sheepskin. The dresses were fringed and decorated with quillwork and paint. In winter, they would add sleeves to the dresses and wear buckskin leggings. They would also wear robes made of buffalo hide. 
Males wore knee length breechcloths, flaps of buck skin that covered around the waist on front and back, along with shirts, leggings and moccasins, Males also wore Buffalo robes in winter. The designs painted or quillworked onto the men’s shirts often represented deed’s of heroism in battle or on hunts. 
Women wore their hair loose or in two braids. Men wore hair loose during ceremonies, but had a variety of hairstyles during daily life.
Blackfeet headdresses typically were made of beaded headbands adorned with owl feathers. The traditional headdresses were replaced in the early 1900s by eagle feather headdresses similar to those typically worn by the Sioux, which were thought to be more recognized in Washington, DC when delegations went to negotiate treaties. These eagle feather headdresses became more associated with the Blackfeet when the Great Northern Railway and Glacier National Park in Montana began requiring Blackfeet who worked in the lodge to wear them in 1917.
In traditional headdresses, each feather represented a story of the warrior who wore it. Once the war bonnet was full, a trailer of feathers was added as stories were added to the warrior’s deeds. As Christian missionaries and government agents attempted to destroy Blackfeet traditional beliefs and practices, these sacred headdresses were placed in the care of ceremonial leaders, where they remain carefully guarded even now. 
The Blackfeet ate mostly buffalo meat, although they also hunted deer, elk, bighorn sheep, mountain goats and moose. They would trap beavers, otter, muskrats, foxes, wolves, weasels and mink for the fur.  Blackfeet also caught ducks and waterfowl for eggs, but rarely ate fish. They also gathered wild fruit, nuts, berries and roots to eat fresh, cook in soups or dry to save for winter. During the winter, the Blackfeet ate mostly dried buffalo, roots and berries.
Much of what is considered Blackfeet “art” by outsiders is actually tools and practical everyday objects made by the People. Blackfeet are renowned for the quality and beauty of their craftsmanship, including clothing, headdresses, tools, weapons and tipis. Many tools, including knives, household utensils and building tools were made from parts of the buffalo. Blackfeet believed in using every part of the buffalo and other animals hunted. Even Buffalo droppings were used to start campfires.
In the mid 1800s, United States and Canadian governments negotiated treaties with the Blackfeet to decrease violence. Through these treaties, Blackfeet were forced onto smaller territory, eventually losing much of their way of life. During the late 1800s, mission schools were opened that undermined many of the traditional Blackfeet ways and converted many to Christianity. Many Blackfeet today follow both Christian religion and traditional Blackfeet ways. 
The children were taken away from the tribes to be taught in boarding schools. They were forced to wear european clothing which the Blackfeet called “citizen” clothes. The children were not allowed to speak their own language or wear traditional clothing.
The Blackfeet Reservation was established by a treaty in 1855. Life on the Reservation was hard in the beginning. There were few jobs and people were dying from hunger. The People had been promised money for giving away part of their land but those promises, along with promises of food deliveries were broken by both the US and Canadian Governments. Numerous outbreaks of smallpox epidemics struck the reservation, killing many. Continued destruction of the buffalo herds lead to further changes in the tribal culture. To combat issues, the government suggested the tribes start farming, which was difficult at first as they had never been a farming society. 
In 1934, the U.S. Congress passed the Indian Reorganization Act, which allowed the tribe to establish a government and take back some control of their lives. 
Today there are more than 30,000 Blackfeet. 17,300 are registered members of the Blackfeet Nation. The Blackfeet are one of the ten largest remaining tribes in the United States.  The current reservation is in Northwest Montana bordered by Glacier National Park and Canada. One of the largest reservations in America, it covers 1.5 million acres. The reservation has forestlands, oil and gas reserves, 518 miles of streams, and 180 bodies of water, including 8 large lakes. Today, the tribe is governed by the Blackfeet Tribal Business Council, which is composed of 9 members from 4 districts, each elected for a four year term.
Today, the Blackfeet are farmers and ranchers. The tribe owns a pencil factory and oil and gas refinery where many members work. 
A few Blackfeet have become well known in modern times. Well known Canadian architect Douglas Cardinal is a member of the Blackfeet Nation. He graduated from University of Texas in 1963 and is known for unique styling of building design. He was the architect who designed the building that houses the National Museum of the American Indian on the National Mall in Washington, DC.
Earl Old Person is a tribal leader who became the youngest elected member of the Tribal Business Council in 1954 and became chairman in 1964. In 1978, he was appointed an Honorary Chief for Life of the Blackfeet. Under his leadership, the tribe has built a community college, industrial park, many schools and houses. He also helped establish the Museum of the Plains Indian and restored a buffalo herd to the reservation.
        The Blackfeet Nation is one of the few native american people to survive the European invasion of Northern America. However, they were not without hardship. Smallpox epidemics in 1781, 1837, 1845, and 1869 from contact with American settlers
and traders killed off hundreds of Blackfeet. Blackfeet had little to no resistance to the disease.
Sport hunting of the buffalo killed off most of the game the Blackfeet relied on for food, clothing and culture. At one point, as many as 60 million buffalo lived on the prairies. Sport hunting brought the buffalo to nearly extinct.
Government influence forced many Blackfeet to abandon their traditional ways between 1907 and 1921. By 1920, disease, sickness, and starvation had reduced the tribal numbers in Montana to 2,000. Despite all this, the tribe has survived and even thrived in recent years. 
        Even through all the hardships the Blackfeet had, they still thrive to this day, and still have some pretty cool culture, and ways of life. They produce beautiful, practical art. They contribute to society on and off the reservations. They remain a strong people, despite the loss of much of their original lands.
